Bitcoin Core P2P/net -- PRs and issue discussions

-----

https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/8282
net: Feeler connections to increase online addrs in the tried table.
EthanHeilman

https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/8594
Do not add random inbound peers to addrman. #8594
gmaxwell

https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/9037
net: Add test-before-evict discipline to addrman
EthanHeilman

-----

27 Nov 2020

sdaftuar dhruvm: i saw your question about my comment here:
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19858/files#r483713328. the point i was
trying to make is that it's healthy for the whole network if any honest node is
engaging in the proposed behavior because even an eclipsed (listening) node will
eventually get an inbound connection from the honest nodes who are syncing tips
with everyone in their addrman, and at the point that happens they'll have a
chance to learn of a block from the incoming connection. at any rate this ties
right into the comment that amiti made, that by creating new edges in the
network graph all the time, we are hardening the network against partition
attacks (ie raising the cost to an attacker of being able to successfully
partition the network for a given amount of time). please feel free to ping me
here if you have more questions.

<dhruvm> sdaftuar: Thank you. That's what I originally thought this was about --
helping nodes that are listening, eclipsed and addrman 100% poisoned(especially
because listening nodes are easier to poison iiuc). To my rookie eye, that'd
argue that this PR is not merely an incremental change. There are no other
mechanisms today that I know of where the network can help an eclipsed node
where the owner does not know it is eclipsed. Would you agree? When addrman is
100% poisoned, the node does not have memory of any peer outside the dishonest
network, but the honest network still has memory of this trapped, honest node.

<sdaftuar> dhruvm: i don't understand the "addrman 100% poisoned" reference -- a
peer can be eclipsed regardless of how "poisoned" its addrman is, it's just a
question of likelihood/cost. an adversary with 10 (diverse) ip addresses can
(with very low probability) eclipse new nodes coming online, today, because
aside from the stale-tip-detection logic, we don't make any attempt to rotate
our outbound peers and it's possible to bypass that logic by feeding blocks
(slowly) to the target peer, which opens up certain kinds of attacks (either by
mining a bogus/less work chain, or even just keeping a peer lagged behind the
network for the purposes of attacks on eg layer 2 systems like
lightning). anyway i do agree with the statement that this PR is not just an
incremental change to our peering/network topology -- it would be a step-up in
costs to an attacker to sustain a partitioning attack against a node, because
after this pr we should always eventually find the honest chain, as long as we
have at least 1 honest peer in our addrman. (of course, if our addrman is taken
over, then things are pretty hopeless). but your point is right that if we're a
listening node and our addrman is taken over, then theoretically honest peers
could still connect in to us and keep us connected to the honest network. that
seems an unlikely situation however, as if we're taking connections from honest
peers, we should also have a not-completely-overrun addrman

<dhruvm> Thank you, that helps me understand. If an incoming block-relay
connection reveals we are behind by more than 1 block, and is a listening peer,
are there downsides to evicting an outbound peer to open a slot for the more
up-to-date peer?

<sdaftuar> i think it's hard to say...eviction of an existing peer can be a
dangerous thing, because an adversary can use such behavior to (at some cost)
cause you to disconnect honest peers. but if you design it right, i think it
could be a fine and beneficial behavior even to seek out new outbound peers if
you get indications that none of your current peers are themselves connected to
the honest, most-work network. the existing outbound peer rotation/eviction
system takes some care to only consider 4 of our 8 peers for eviction, and then
chooses the one that has least recently provided us a block, i think. so that
even if an adversary were trying to game our rules, or if there was some network
condition we failed to foresee that caused an unexpected behavior, at least 4 of
our 8 peers would be unaffected by the eviction logic.

-----

25 Dec 2019

<gleb> Is there a way to trick functional tests to think that nodes are not
connected locally? Like, so that addr is not 127.0.0.1

<gwillen> gleb: I don't know if they're checking for 127.0.0.1 specifically, but
you can use anything in 127.* and it will work as localhost. if that doesn't
work, you can also use your own external IP, and see if it is able to catch that

<gleb> No, it's like *I need* the node to think that a connection between 2
regtest nodes is not local. So that they see each other as something from the
internet

<gwillen> right, that's what I'm saying -- try giving it 127.0.0.2 to connect
to, and see if it believes that's not local, or if your LAN IP is 192.168.1.99,
try giving it that. it will still connect locally but the IP will be different
(but if it's connecting to itself automatically and you don't supply the IP,
then I'm not sure)

<gleb> gwillen: Thanks. I gave up and tested manually. If you have a bit more
time, perhaps looking at the last comment in 16702 would let you know what I
want to achieve better, cuz it's hard to explain without context. If not, no
worries, at this point I feel like there is no good answer anyway =\

<gwillen> gleb: I do see what you mean (and it turns out that none of my
suggestions would work anyway, since all of the addresses I suggested will
identify as "local"), or rather as !routable

<pinheadmz> gleb: is there any sense in "allowing" local connections in regtest
mode only? you'd still have to shim in a ASN number for 127.0.0.1 ...

<gwillen> pinheadmz: it seems like you'd have to shim multiple ones, to test
meaningfully, but I guess you could do that with a fake asmap data file. in the
code you would just need to disable the check for local addresses for testing,
and it does make _some_ sense to just remove all the nonroutable checks in
regtest, potentially

-----

2019-05-17 Slow getrawmempool

<gmaxwell> getrawmempool verbose is astonishingly slow, a PR just went in to
make it faster but it is still astonishingly slow. I am reasonably confident
that it was not anywhere near this slow last time the mempools were big.

<gmaxwell> This change in Aug 2017 made all the UNIVALUE additions quadratic:
https://github.com/bitcoin-core/univalue/commit/ceb1194137421afba01e8c1042bf75f3a2cdddc3
(which probably makes a number of our other RPCs slow too), but the changes
works around it.

-----

2019-05-11 GETDATA issues

<gmaxwell> gleb: sdaftuar: uh, is random fetch ordering putting more stress on
orphan handling?  The INVs we get from peers are usually in dependency
order. That makes us fetch in dependency order, and thus the results we get back
end up being mostly in dependency order.

<gmaxwell> With the random ordering I think we're breaking that.

<sdaftuar> gmaxwell: i asked you that question! :P .. but yeah i wonder the same

<gmaxwell> oh. you did? damn. sorry, fishbrain here.

<gmaxwell> I noticed more use of the orphanmap in my logs which is what caused
me to ask the question, so I believe the answer is yes :/ ... this is annoying

<sdaftuar> i think it at least seems we gave this insufficient thought before
merging #14897, so if you have reason to believe it's making things worse, i
certainly believe it

  https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/14897 "randomize GETDATA(tx) request
  order and introduce bias toward outbound by naumenkogs" · Pull Request #14897

<gmaxwell> It's not so much a problem but the orphan map is limited in size and
its expiration process is random, so you really don't want to be using it "by
default". One answer to this would be to just improve the orphan map behavior.

<sdaftuar> gmaxwell: regarding the orphan transaction issue and the GETDATA
randomization behavior, it looks to me like:

  (a) we do not put any delay on GETDATA requests for outbound peers
      announcing a tx for the first time, and

  (b) we have a fixed delay for inbound peers announcing a tx for the first time

<sdaftuar> gmaxwell: so i think in the case of a peer announcing a set of
transactions that are new to us, we'll request those transactions in dependency
order from that peer, except if an inbound peer's announcement is partially
supserseded by a later announcement from an outbound peer for a subset of the
transactions

<sdaftuar> gmaxwell: so that seems like it should be a relatively small effect
(and is an effect we have to some degree already).

----

Dandelion: Suhas notes in
https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/81503/what-is-the-tradeoff-between-privacy-and-implementation-complexity-of-dandelion
that the tradeoff of increased complexity for limited additional privacy may not
be worth it.

-----

Banning

<ossifrage> Should bitcoind be more aggressive in banning nodes that send
high-hash or bad-diffbits?

<luke-jr> ossifrage: no, we're already too aggressive.

<sipa> i don't see a good reason not to disconnect on invalid PoW,
actually. that's unambiguously invalid, for as long as the protocol existed.

<luke-jr> disconnect != ban. though having difficulty coming up with a scenario
where banning would be bad. oh, thought of one: a hardfork to reclaim
always-zero bits in the header. we'd of course reject the HF blocks, but we
still want to share our best chain with such nodes. disconnection might be a
problem there, too.

<sipa> i think banning is desired behavior between nodes on different sides of a
HF, to partition as quickly as possible, and not waste connection slots on
either side with peers they disagree with.

<luke-jr> partitioning is bad and should not happen with a HF.

<sipa> ?!

<luke-jr> furthermore, it is at best a false sense of "security" since anyone
can start a bridge later.

<sipa> there is nothing to bridge.

<luke-jr> I'm talking about real HFs, not scamcoins calling themselves HFs. also
HFs that *only* make invalid blocks valid, in this example, so the HF'd nodes
would always prefer the pre-HF chain, so long as they see it, and it's more work
ofc.

<sipa> as long as no such HF is defined, there is no need to accomodate
it. right now, seeing a peer give you a block with invalid PoW is a sign that
peer is, from your perspective, completely broken.

<luke-jr> I'm not suggesting accomodation, just not going out of the way to
disconnect it. outgoing connections, sure, since those are providing services to
us primarily, but inbound connections are primarily for the sake of the other
node.

<sipa> that's reasonable.

-----

PR 19219 Replace automatic bans with discouragement filter by sipa
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19219

This patch improves performance and resource usage around IP addresses that are
banned for misbehavior. They're already not actually banned since #14929, as
connections from them are still allowed, but they are preferred for eviction if
the inbound connection slots are full.

Stop treating these like manually banned IP ranges, and instead just keep them
in a rolling Bloom filter of misbehaving nodes, which isn't persisted to disk or
exposed through the ban framework. The effect remains the same: preferred for
eviction, avoided for outgoing connections, and not relayed to other peers.

Also change the name of this mechanism to "discouraged" to better reflect
reality.


jonatack

Concept ACK on improving the performance/resource usage of IsBanned.

Light code review ACK 4c4df6b. I have not benchmarked the performance deltas of
IsBanned (presumably improved for discouraged addrs) and IsBannedLevel
(presumably marginally worse for non-banned addrs) and how meaningful they are
with this change or the shape of the BanReason distribution and how manipulable
it is. Benchmarking these and test coverage would be good.

A comment on the choice of nElements and nFPRate may be good here. These are the
same as for filterInventoryKnown.



luke:
I think we need to skip over BanReasonNodeMisbehaving entries when loading
existing ban data?

sipa:
They (by default) have a 24 hour limit only, and during that time, they will
just be treated as a real ban instead of a discouragement.



jasonbcox
Looks like ClearBanned() should call m_discouraged.reset() otherwise the
clearbanned RPC no longer does what users expect.

sipa:
I considered that, but I think it would be counterintuitive. Discouragement
isn't exposed as bans (it's not visible or accessible in RPCs or UI) as it's a
completely automatic process, so I think that exposing a way to clear it would
violate that abstraction.

jasonbcox:
I see. The current implementation may introduce subtle bugs then, especially
considering that IsBanned() is now unintuitively named. setban "someIP" "add"
may return Error: IP/Subnet already banned for instance.

sipa:
Nice catch. I've addressed it by adding a separate IsBannedOrDiscouraged that's
distinct from IsBanned.



jnewbery:

This seems like an improvement, but it leaves the BanMan with a
slightly odd and inconsistent interface:

- Ban() has an enum as its second parameter, but that parameter is only ever set
to BanReasonManuallyAdded.

- If IsBanned() is called with an address, it returns whether an address is
discouraged or banned. If it's called with a subnet, it returns if it's banned,
but not discouraged.

- Unban() won't remove a discouraged address from banman, but it's not possible
to add an outbound connection to that address with addnode onetry.

- ClearBanned() (which is called by the clearban RPC ("Clear all banned IPs"))
doesn't clear discouraged addresses.

- The listbanned RPC returns a ban_reason, which can only ever be "manually
added". (banReasonToString() is basically dead code now).

- It'd be nice to rationalize this so BanMan just had a setter SetBanLevel()
function and a getter GetBanLevel() function.

sipa:

Most of those things are no longer true, apart from the BanReason being
superfluous now (there is a separate IsBannedOrDiscouraged). I think a follow-up
can remove BanReason altogether, but I think it's preferable to not have a
SetBanLevel - discouragement and banning are very different concepts (and it
wouldn't be unreasonable to move discouragement elsewhere entirely).



cculianu:
You really should add a benchmark for this. What happens if someone floods the
filter with a big block of 1 million IPv6 addresses?

sipa:
Rolling Bloom filters only keep the last N elements added; 50000 in this
case. Their performance is not affected by how many elements are kept. So worst
case, being flooded with IPs would reduce the effectiveness of the filter in
keeping broken peers out.

cculianu:
Right, so you can flood the filter with even something like 150k inserts,
saturate it to always return false positive, and then all peers are "equally
discouraged" (meaning you have no ban policy anymore)....

sipa:
No, the false positive rate never goes above the specified one (0.000001 in this
case). The rolling aspect discards old entries.

jnewbery:
I suggest you take a look at the CRollingBloomFilter implementation. The rolling
bloom filter is actually multiple generations of bloom filters, so you can't
saturate it by adding many entries. It'll just discard the oldest generation
when it reaches (max entries * 3/2).

cculianu:
Ok, so basically:
- this is as if you had a typical hash table implementation clamped to 75k most
  recent entries
- but it has no ability to unban
- it only eats about 67k memory
- small tiny chance of false positives.
- slightly slower insertions and lookups than a hash table, but not monstrously
  so.
Got it. Thanks.

sipa:
Indeed. Your numbers are a bit off: it only guarantees 50000 entries (it keeps
up to 75000, but the last 25000 are removed whenever that number is
exceeded). It also uses around 528 KiB (at an fprate of 1/1000000).

cculianu:
Oh right.. it's 67k uint64's -> 528KiB. My bad.
Hmm. For ~800KiB you could have just implemented a regular hash table
(std::unordered_map, etc) or a std::unordered_set, clamped it to 50k items, and
then had the ability to query it, iterate over it, show it in the UI, and/or
remove individual items.

sipa:
Yeah, we do have a limitedmap data structure that implements effectively
that. Its memory usage is significantly worse though (because every entry in the
map needs several pointers, plus dynamic allocation overhead). If I recall the
number correctly it would be 4 MiB at least for 50000 entries.

cculianu:

I'm aware of that data structure but it's not a hash table, it's a red-black
tree based map, which also stores a reverse-map as well. It's not very efficient
for this situation...

You can probably get away with just a straight hash table (unordered_map) with
some wrapper that periodically sweeps it to clamp it to some max size --
probably just remove the oldest entries by creation time. While not ideal, it
has some advantages -- namely being able to remove from the set... and blazing
fast lookups.

I guess it's your call -- you either pay the memory and upkeep costs and
preserve the facility of a traditional ban list and save a few cycles on lookups
-- or you toss that aside and maintain a bloom set and redefine the semantics of
banning (which is already happening anyway)...

sipa:

Hash table or red-black tree doesn't matter much. It's (table size + 2 pointers
+ alloc overhead per entry) or (3 pointers + 1 int + alloc overhead per entry),
and in both cases you need a way to iterate efficiently in order of insertion
(either through a separate map like limitedmap does, or by doubly-linking the
elements together like is supported by boost::multi_index). Even if you don't do
that and just occasionally sweep, you need to keep track of insertion time per
item, and the allocation overheads don't go away.

In either case, the overhead is much larger than a rolling bloom filter, and as
you say - changes to the semantics of auto banned items are happening anyway.


sipa:

I've made a few changes suggested by @jnewbery. The PR is now split into two
commits:

- The first is a minimal change that implements the new behavior (smaller than
  the previous PR), plus release notes and RPC documentation changes.

- The second makes the distinction between discouraging and banning much cleaner
  in the interface, removing BanReason altogether.

I'm happy to split off the second commit. It could also be ignored in backports.
